# The Guy from Hell

## Chapter 1

What a village! I’ve never seen a village like this and didn’t even know such villages existed. The houses are round, brown, windowless, standing on stilts like watchtowers, and underneath them, there’s all sorts of junk piled up – huge pots, troughs, rusty cauldrons, wooden rakes, shovels… The ground between the houses is clay, so burnt and trampled that it even shines. And everywhere you look, there are nets. Dry nets. I don’t know what they catch with these nets here: swamp on the right, swamp on the left, smells like a dump… A dreadful hole. They’ve been rotting here for a thousand years and, if not for the duke, would have rotted for another thousand. The North. Wilderness. And, of course, no residents in sight. Either they ran away, were taken, or are hiding.

In the square near the trading post, a field kitchen, taken off its wheels, was smoking. A huge porcupine – as wide as he was tall – in a dirty white apron over his dirty gray uniform, was stirring a pot with a long-handled ladle. I think it was mainly this pot that was causing the village to stink.

We approached, and Cheetah, stopping, asked where the commander was. This creature didn’t even turn around – it muttered something into its stew and pointed with the ladle somewhere down the street. I gave it a kick in the backside with the toe of my boot, and it quickly turned around, saw our uniforms, and immediately stood at attention. Its face matched its ham-like body, and it hadn’t been shaved for a whole week, this porcupine.

“So where’s your commander?” Cheetah asked again, pressing his cane into the porcupine’s fat neck under its double chin.

The porcupine rolled his eyes, smacked his lips, and rasped:

“Sorry, sir senior instructor… The staff major is at the positions… Please, down this street… right at the outskirts… Accept my apologies, sir senior instructor…”

He kept rasping and gurgling something, and from around the corner of the trading post, two more porcupines emerged – even scarier than this one, complete scarecrows without weapons or headgear. They saw us and froze at attention. Cheetah just looked at them, sighed, and then walked on, tapping his cane against his boot.

Yes, we got here just in time. These porcupines, they would have made a mess of things! I’ve only seen three of them so far, but I’m already sick of them, and it’s clear to me that this kind of unit, excuse the expression, cobbled together from rear-line pests, hastily and haphazardly, with all these regimental bakers, brigade cobblers, clerks, quartermasters, idiots, lazybones, half-blind fools, and funeral detail eagles – they’re all walking fertilizer, lubricant for a bayonet. The imperial armored vehicles would have rolled through them without even noticing anyone was there. No trouble at all.

Someone called out to us. To the left, between two houses, there was a camouflage tent set up and a white-green cloth hanging on a pole. A medical post. Two more porcupines were slowly rummaging through green packs of medical supplies, and on mats thrown directly on the ground lay the wounded. There were three wounded in total; one, with his head bandaged, was propped up on his elbow, looking at us. When we turned around, he called out again:

“Sir, instructor! Just a moment, please!…”

We approached. Cheetah squatted down, and I remained standing behind him. The wounded man had no visible insignia; he was wearing a torn, burnt camouflage jumpsuit, unbuttoned on his bare hairy chest. But from his face, from his wild eyes with singed eyelashes, I immediately knew that this one wasn’t a porcupine, no, this one was the real deal. And I was right.

“Brigadier-Jaeger Baron Tragg,” he introduced himself. It sounded like tank treads clanking. “Commander of the independent 18th Forest Jaeger unit.”

“Senior Instructor Digga,” Cheetah said. “I’m listening, brave brother.”

“A cigarette…” the baron asked in a suddenly hoarse voice.

While Cheetah was taking out his cigarette case, he hurriedly continued:

“Got hit by a flamethrower, scorched like a pig… Thank God, the swamp was nearby, I submerged up to my eyebrows… But my cigarettes – turned to mush… Thanks…”

He took a drag, closing his eyes, and immediately started coughing harshly, turning blue, convulsing. A drop of blood oozed from under the bandage on his cheek and congealed, like resin. Without turning, Cheetah extended his hand over his shoulder and snapped his fingers. I pulled the flask from my belt and handed it to him. The baron took a few gulps, and he seemed to feel a bit better. The other two wounded lay motionless – either they were asleep or already gone. The medics glanced at us fearfully. Not really looking, just sneaking glances.

“Good…” Baron Tragg said, returning the flask. “How many men do you have?”

“Forty,” Cheetah replied. “Keep the flask… Keep it for yourself.”

“Forty… Forty Fighting Cats…”

“Kittens,” Cheetah said. “Unfortunately… But we’ll do everything we can.”

The baron looked at him from under his burnt eyebrows. There was agony in his eyes.

“Listen, brave brother,” he said. “I have no one left. I’ve been retreating from the pass for three days. Constant battles. The rat-eaters are coming on armored vehicles. I’ve burned about twenty of them. The last two – yesterday… right here, on the outskirts… you’ll see. This staff major… an idiot and a coward… an old wreck… I wanted to shoot him, but I had no bullets left. Can you imagine? Not a single bullet! He was hiding in the village with his porcupines, watching as we were burned out one by one… What was I saying? Yes! Where is Hagrid’s brigade? The radio is shattered… The last message was: ‘Hold on, Hagrid’s brigade is on the way…’ Listen, a cigarette… And inform headquarters that the 18th independent is no more.”

The baron was already delirious. His wild eyes were clouded, and his tongue barely moved. He fell onto his back, still talking, talking, mumbling, rasping, and his gnarled fingers restlessly groped around, clutching at the edges of the mat, then at his jumpsuit. Then he suddenly fell silent mid-sentence, and Cheetah stood up.

He slowly pulled out a cigarette, not taking his eyes off the upturned face, flicked the lighter, then leaned down and placed the cigarette case along with the lighter next to the blackened fingers, which greedily clutched the cigarette case and gripped it tightly. Without a word, Cheetah turned, and we moved on.

I thought that it was probably merciful—the brigadier had lost consciousness just in time. Otherwise, he would have had to hear that Hagrid’s brigade was no more either. They were hit overnight by a carpet bombing on the supply route—we spent two hours clearing the highway of wreckage and the cold meat of bodies, fending off the mad ones trying to crawl under the trucks to hide. All we found of Hagrid was his general’s cap, crusted with blood… A chill ran through me when I remembered all this, and I involuntarily glanced at the sky and felt relieved at how low, gray, and bleak it was.

The first thing we saw as we stepped beyond the outskirts was an imperial armored vehicle that had veered off the road and crashed nose-first into the village well. It had already cooled down, and the grass around it was coated in thick soot. A dead rat-eater lay face down under the open side hatch—everything on him was burned, except for his reddish boots with triple soles. The rat-eaters have good boots! Their boots are good, their armored vehicles, and maybe their bombers too. But as soldiers, everyone knows they are useless. Jackals.

“How do you like this position, Gaag?” asked Cheetah.

I looked around. What a position! I couldn’t believe my eyes. The porcupines had dug themselves trenches on both sides of the road, right in the middle of the clearing between the village outskirts and the jungle. The jungle stood like a wall in front of the trenches, about fifty paces away, no more. You could amass a regiment, a brigade, whatever you wanted there, and the trenches wouldn’t know a thing about it. And when they did find out, it would be too late to do anything. The trenches on the left flank had a swamp behind them. The trenches on the right flank had a flat field behind them, which had something planted before, now all burnt. Yeah…

“I don’t like this position,” I said.

Me neither,” said Cheetah.

Of course! It wasn’t just the position here. There were also the porcupines. There were about a hundred of them, at least, wandering around their position like it was a marketplace. Some had gathered in circles, lighting fires. Others just stood there with their hands in their sleeves. And still others were just wandering around.

Rifles were lying around near the trenches, machine guns were standing aimlessly with their barrels pointed up at the low sky. In the middle of the road, stuck in the mud up to the hubs, was a rocket launcher, looking completely out of place. An elderly porcupine sat on the carriage – whether he was a sentry or just resting after wandering around, I couldn’t tell. Either way, he was harmless: he just sat there, picking his ear with a twig.

The whole scene made me feel sour. If it were up to me, I would have mowed down this entire marketplace with a machine gun… I looked at Cheetah hopefully, but he remained silent, just moving his hooked nose left to right and right to left.

Angry voices sounded behind us, and I turned around. Under the stairs of the last house, two porcupines were arguing. They were fighting over a wooden trough – each one pulling it towards themselves, each spewing vile curses. These two, I would have mowed down with particular pleasure. Cheetah said to me:

“Bring them here.”

I quickly jumped over to these idiots, smacked one on the hands with my rifle barrel, then the other. When they looked at me, dropping their trough, I jerked my head towards Cheetah. They didn’t even squeak. Then it hit them both, like in a steam bath. Wiping their faces with their sleeves as they went, they jogged over to Cheetah in a woman’s trot and stood two steps in front of him, looking like untidy, sweaty piles.

Cheetah slowly raised his cane, aimed it like he was playing billiards, and whacked them – once across the face of one and then the other. Then he looked at them, the brutes, and simply said:

“Bring the commander to me. Quickly.”

No, guys. Cheetah clearly hadn’t expected things to be this bad here. Of course, we weren’t expecting anything good. When they send the Fighting Cats to plug a breach, it’s obvious things are dire. But this… Even the tip of Cheetah’s nose had turned white.

Finally, their commander appeared. A tall, sleepy-looking stick of a man with gray sideburns emerged from behind the houses, buttoning his tunic as he came. He was at least fifty years old. His nose was red and veiny, and he wore smudged pince-nez like the staff officers did in that war. Wet crumbs of chewing tobacco clung to his long chin. He introduced himself as a staff major and tried to switch to a casual tone with Cheetah.

No way! Cheetah gave him such a frosty reception that he seemed to shrink in stature. He had been half a head taller at first, but after a minute, snake’s milk! He was already looking up at Cheetah, a little gray old man of average height.

So, it turned out like this. The staff major didn’t know where the enemy was or how many of them there were. His task was to hold the village until reinforcements arrived. His fighting force consisted of 116 soldiers with eight machine guns and two rocket launchers; almost all the soldiers were only partially fit for duty, and after yesterday’s forced march, twenty-seven of them were lying in those houses over there – some with chafing, some with hernias, and various other issues.

“Listen,” Cheetah suddenly said. “What’s going on over there?”

The staff major stopped mid-sentence and looked where the polished cane was pointing. My goodness, what eyes our Cheetah has! Only now did I notice: in the biggest circle around one of the fires, amidst the gray jackets of our porcupines, were the disgusting striped jumpsuits of imperial armored infantry. Snake’s milk! One, two, three… Four rat-eaters by our fire, and these pigs are practically hugging them. Smoking. And even laughing about something…

“Over there?” the staff major said, looking at Cheetah with his rabbit-like eyes. “Are you referring to the prisoners, sir?”

Cheetah didn’t respond. The staff porcupine put his pince-nez back on and launched into an explanation. These, you see, are prisoners, but they have nothing to do with us, you see. They were captured in yesterday’s battle by the jaegers. Lacking transportation and sufficient personnel for proper guarding…

“Gaag” Cheetah said. “Take them to Tick and have them interrogated first…”

I snapped the bolt and walked over to the fire. The bastards were smoking and sipping something from mugs. Their faces were content and shiny. Disgusting… And that blond one, patting a porcupine on the back, and the porcupine, that brainless log, was grinning and nodding his head. Are they drunk or something?

I walked right up to them. The porcupines noticed me from a distance, went silent, and started quietly scattering in all directions. Some of them, apparently too scared to move, just sat there, wide-eyed and gaping. The striped ones, though—they turned pale gray. They knew our emblem, the rat-eaters had heard of us!

I ordered them to stand up. They stood, reluctantly. I ordered them to line up. They did, having no other choice. The blond one started babbling something in our language—I poked him in the ribs with the barrel, and he fell silent. So, I marched them off, single file, heads down, hands behind their backs. Rats. And they even smelled like rats… Two were strong men, broad-shouldered, and two looked like they were from the latest conscription, scrawny kids, maybe just a bit older than me.

I hate prisoners. What kind of slime are they, going to war and ending up captured? I get it, they’re rat-eaters, but still, it’s disgusting, no matter how you look at it… Well, here we go: one of the scrawny ones doubled over and started vomiting. Move it, move it, snake’s milk! The second one started too. Ugh! How these rats sense impending death, just like real rats. And now, they’d do anything to save themselves – betray, sell out, become slaves…

“Double-time, march!” I barked in their language.

They started running. Slowly, poorly. That blond one was limping. Severely injured, I suppose; twisted his ankle in the latrine. No matter, you’ll hobble along.

We reached the edge of the village, where the trucks were parked—the guys saw us and started shouting and whistling. I found a large puddle, shoved the prisoners face-first into the mud, and headed to the front truck where Tick was. And there he was, jumping out to meet me—his face cheerful, the little mustache under his nose bristling, and a bone cigarette holder clenched in his teeth, just like the senior class fashion.

“Well, what do you have to say, brother doomsayer?” he says to me.

I reported to him: such and such, this is the situation, and the prisoners must be interrogated first. And then I added on my own:

“Don’t forget about me, Tick,” I said. “After all, I brought them here…”

“You’re talking about the collar?” he asks absently, while looking around.

“Exactly! Who brought them here, after all?”

“I just don’t see a thing. We can’t take them all the way to the forest…”

“How about on the stilts?”

“We could use the stilts, of course… But why?” He looked at me. “And what if we do it without the stilts? Will you take it on?”

There you go. Just as I thought. I’m always out of luck. Is it my fault that my assistant was kept at the headquarters? And alone — how? I don’t even have the strength. I’ll be struggling until evening and then scrubbing myself clean all night.

“You know,” I said to Tick. “I don’t have an assistant.”

“And alone?” he asks. “Do you have a cord with you?”

I got carried away with excitement here.

“Will you hold them?” I ask.

He looked at me, and my heart sank immediately.

“Kitten…” he says. “You’re going to have fun here while Cheetah is alone there? Take three pairs and get to Cheetah! Quickly!”

There was nothing to be done. It wasn’t meant to be, just unlucky. I took one last look at my striped ones, slung my rifle over my shoulder, and shouted at the top of my lungs:

“First, second, third pairs – to me!”

The kittens tumbled off the truck like peas: Hare with Rooster, Nosy with Crocodile, Sniper with that one… what’s his name… I wasn’t used to him yet, he had just been transferred to us from the Piggan School – he killed the wrong person there, so they sent him to us.

I had noticed it a long time ago but never mentioned it to anyone: if Cat happened to off a civilian in a fit of anger, an order would immediately go out. So-and-so with such-and-such a nickname is to be executed for committing a criminal offense. They would drag him out to the parade ground, stand him before his best friends, fire a volley at him, toss his body into a truck for a dishonorable burial, and then you’d hear that the guys had seen him either on an operation or in another unit… And I think that’s the right way to do it.

Well, I commanded “double-time,” and we hurried back to Cheetah. And Cheetah wasn’t wasting any time there. I saw that pole of a man, the staff major, trotting towards us, and behind him was a column of about fifty porcupines with shovels and mattocks, their boots thudding, sweaty with steam rising off them. This meant Cheetah had them digging a new position, a real one, for us. Under the house opposite the medical unit, I saw shovels flashing, and there was a rocket launcher set up, and the whole village was bustling like the main street on a name day. The porcupines were scurrying about, and not a single one was empty-handed: either carrying weapons, but those were few, and most were dragging crates of ammunition and machine gun mounts.

Cheetah saw us and expressed his satisfaction. He immediately sent Hare’s and Sniper’s pairs into the jungle for advanced scouting, kept Nosy and Crocodile with him for communication, and said to me:

“Gaag. You’re the best rocket launcher operator in the unit, and I’m counting on you. See those cockroaches? They’re yours. Set up the rocket launcher on that edge, choose a position roughly where our trucks are now. Camouflage well, and open fire when I set the village ablaze. Move out, Cat.”

When I heard all that, I didn’t just run, I practically flew to my cockroaches. My cockroaches, along with the rocket launcher, were stuck in a muddy pothole in the middle of the road and looked like they intended to spend the entire war there. They were barely moving their paws, those lazybones. So, I gave one a smack, kicked another, and hit the third with the butt of my rifle between the shoulder blades, shouting so loudly that it rang in my own ears – my cockroaches started working properly, almost like humans. They lifted the rocket launcher out of the pothole by hand and – march, march – rolled it down the road, with wheels screeching and mud flying, straight into another pothole. This time, I had to pitch in myself. You see, guys, you can make porcupines work too, you just need to know how.

So, my situation was like this. I had already chosen a position – I remembered some thick reddish bushes near the trucks and a flat lowland behind them where we could easily dig in, hidden from any devils coming from the jungle. From there, I would see everything: the road up to the jungle, the whole village outskirts if they pushed through the houses, and the swamp on the left if the armored infantry tried to come through there… I also thought I should remember to ask Klesh for a few twos to cover that side. I had twenty rockets in the trays, provided those clerks hadn’t thrown any out to lighten their load on the way here… well, we’d check that out soon enough, and in any case, once we dug in, I’d have to send the cockroaches for more supplies. I hate having to ration during a fight. That’s not a fight, that’s something else… We had enough time until dusk, and when they attacked at twilight, that wild village would light up, and I’d have them all in my sights – shoot at will. You won’t regret counting on me, Cheetah!

I finished this last thought almost automatically while lying on my back, and in the gray sky above me, burning fragments were flying like strange birds. I hadn’t heard a shot or an explosion, and now I couldn’t hear anything at all. I was deaf. I don’t know how much time had passed, but then I sat up.

From the jungle, armored vehicles were crawling out four abreast, spitting fire and spreading out into a battle formation, with another four following behind them. The village was burning. Smoke hung over the trenches ahead, and there wasn’t a soul in sight. The field kitchen next to the trading post was overturned, with its contents spilled out in a brown mess, steaming. My rocket launcher was also overturned, and the cockroaches were lying in a heap in the ditch. In short, I had taken up a perfect position, snake’s milk!

Then we were hit by a second barrage. It knocked me into the ditch, flipping me head over heels, filling my mouth with clay and my eyes with dirt. I had just gotten to my feet when the third barrage came. And it kept coming, and coming…

We managed to get the rocket launcher back on its wheels, rolled it into the ditch, and I burned one of the armored vehicles. There were only two cockroaches left now; where the third one went, I had no idea.

Then, suddenly and without transition, I found myself on the road. Ahead of me was a whole bunch of striped ones – close, very close, right next to me. The fire reflected blood-red off their blades. A machine gun was roaring deafeningly next to my ear, I had a knife in my hand, and someone was twitching at my feet, knocking against my knees…

Then, meticulously, as if on the training ground, I aimed the rocket launcher at the steel shield advancing on me through the smoke. I could almost hear the instructor’s command: “At the armored infantry… with armor-piercing rounds…” But I couldn’t press the trigger because I had a knife in my hand again…

Then suddenly, there was a lull. It was already twilight. It turned out that my rocket launcher was intact, and so was I. Around me gathered a bunch of porcupines, about ten people. They were all smoking, and someone handed me a flask. Who? Hare? I don’t know… I remember that against the backdrop of a burning house about thirty steps away, there was a strange figure: everyone else was sitting or lying down, but this one was standing, and it looked like he was black and naked… He wasn’t wearing any clothes – no coat, no jacket. Or was he not naked after all? “Hare, who is that standing there?” – “I don’t know, I’m not Hare.” – “Where’s Hare?” – “I don’t know, just drink, drink…”

Then we were digging, hurrying with all our might. This was already a different place. The village was now not to the side but ahead of us. Well, there wasn’t much of a village left – just piles of charred wood, but there were burning armored vehicles on the road. A lot of them. Several. The swampy ground squelched underfoot… “I commend you, well done, Cat…” – “Sorry, Cheetah, I’m not thinking straight. Where are all our guys? Why are there only porcupines here?” – “Everything’s fine, Gaag, keep working, keep working, brave brother, everyone is safe, everyone is impressed with you…”

…Aha! Got it! Right in the blunt snout. It’s backing up, settling on its rear, throwing a shower of sparks into the black sky. They’re running, running! “Cat, on the right! On the right! Now!” I don’t see anything on the right, and I’m not looking. I turn the barrel that way, and suddenly a shower of liquid fire comes straight at me from the black-red haze. Everything ignites at once – the corpses, the ground, the rocket launcher. And some bushes. And me. It hurts. An infernal pain. Like Baron Tragg…

